Dhritrashtr is the very image of ignorance; and Sanjay is the
embodiment of self-restraint. Ignorance lurks at the core of the objective,
the outward-looking mind. With his mind enveloped in darkness,
Dhritrashtr is blind since birth, but he sees and hears through Sanjay,
the epitome of self-control. He knows that God alone is real, but as long
as his infatuation for Duryodhan born from ignorance lasts, his inner
eye will be focused on the Kaurav, who symbolize the ungodly forces
of negative, sinful impulses.
The human body is a field for combat. When there is abundance
of divinity in the realm of the heart, the body is transmuted into a
Dharmkshetr (field of dharm), but it degenerates into a Kurukshetr when
it is infested with demoniacal powers. Kuru means “do” and the word is
an imperative. As Lord Krishn has said, “Driven by the three properties2
born out of prakriti (nature) man is compelled to act; without action he
cannot even live for a moment.” These properties, virtue, ignorance,
and passion, compel him to act. Even in sleep action does not cease,
for it is the necessary sustenance for the body. The three properties
bind men, from the level of gods to that of the lowest creatures such as
worms. So long as the material world and its properties are, kuru must
be. Therefore, the sphere of birth and death, of sinful impulses, which
are evolved from a previous source or prakriti (nature) is Kurukshetr,
whereas the sphere of righteous impulses which guide the Self to God,
the highest spiritual reality, is Dharmkshetr.
Archaeologists are engaged in research in Punjab, Kashi, and
Prayag to locate Kurukshetr. But the poet of the Geeta has himself
suggested, through Lord Krishn, where the war of his sacred poem was
fought. “This body is itself, O Arjun, a battlefield, and one who conquers
it grows spiritually dexterous by perceiving its essence.” He then
elaborates the structure of this “battlefield”, sphere of action, constituted
of ten perceptors3, the objective and the subjective mind, the ego, all
the five perversions [object carriers (tanmatra) of the five senses of
perception - word, touch, form, taste and smell - these are the five
objects of the senses] and the three properties. The body itself is a
field, a ring or an arena. The forces that clash on this field are twofold,
the godly and the ungodly, the divine and the devilish, the offspring of
Pandu and those of Dhritrashtr, the forces that are congenial to the
essentially divine character of the Self and those which offend and
demean it.
The clue to the mystery of the conflict between the opposed
impulses begins to be seen when one turns for enlightenment to an
exalted sage who has enriched himself with worship and meditation.
This field belongs to one who realizes its essence, and the war fought
on it is the only real war. History is crowded with wars of the world, but
the victors in these wars have but sought in vain for a permanent
conquest. These wars were nothing beyond acts of retribution. True
victory lies in subduing matter and in perceiving, as well as becoming
one with, the Supreme Spirit that transcends it. This is the only conquest
in which there is no prospect of defeat. This is true salvation after
which there are no fetters of birth and death.
The mind lying in the abyss of ignorance perceives through self
restraint, and thus knows what has transpired on the battlefield, where
fighters include even those who have known its reality. Vision is ever in
proportion to mastery of the mind and the senses.
